The Joe Rogan experience.
This is your book about psychological things, right? Explain your book. Yeah.
It's uh, the quick fix, why fad psychology can't cure social.
I that's a good sign that I had to look at the book to remember what it's
called. Uh, I was a science editor at New York magazine.
I wrote about psychology, basically.
Uh <affirmative> and every day we get press releases from Harvard,
from Yale, from university of Pennsylvania,
that psychologists are figuring out amazing stuff about how to fix the world,
how to fix racism, how to fix the educational system. And a lot of these,
when I looked into the more there's like nothing there there's no actual result
there. And people spend, um, you know,
hundreds of millions of dollars on these ideas that don't really do anything.
Have you ever taken the, um, do you know the implicit association test?
What that is? No. All right. Do you know implicit bias? Yes. Okay.
So this is a test. You sit at a computer,
it tells you how unconsciously racist you are.
So anyone listening to this who's done a diversity training recently at work has
probably heard of the implicit association test since 1998.
Leading psychologists are like, this test will measure your unconscious racism,
racism. You're not even aware of.
And this leaks into the real world that makes you do racist stuff.
And we end up spending millions of dollars on it. Every school embraces it,
every company embraces it except whoops, there's nothing there.
It doesn't actually measure anything.
So I'm really interested in those in where like the most, and maybe this is, uh,
why I should drink with Alex Jones.
We're the most important experts in the world. Tell us. And it's just,
it's not true. Mm. Yeah.
Um, how much has to do with when the,
the spreading of this kind of information,
how much of it has to do with click bait?
One of the things that's disturbed me over the last decade or so,
is that journalism,
even journalism at its highest levels without naming any names,
but like fable institutions are resorting to click bait. You know,
my friend, Kurt Metzker said something about the New York times. Once he said,
it's like a fat girl's Tumblr blog now. And I'm like,
that is such a tough thing to say.
But what he was saying was that there's stories that are written in there
that are, they're not what you associate with the New York times. Yeah.
Of old. I still read the New York times. I still love it. Me too.
I think it's great. I mean, I think people always looking for flaws in any,
any institution. Right. But actually a fable one in times of chaos, like we are.
Today. Part of us wants to see them collapse. Exactly.
Part. Yeah. People do, but I still think they're the best. And I think it's, um,
there's something about having, uh,
a reputation to uphold that does force people to the higher standards,
but those standards are different.
That's it's of very difficult to find unbiased,
objective news with a clean headline today because
people aren't buying the newspaper like they were, yeah.
It's mostly clicking things online. And you know,
there's a lot of these that have, they rely on subscription services. You know,
they rely on someone coming along and, uh, saying, you know what?
I value your journalism so much. I'm gonna give you some money.
And then you have to justify the articles. Like, you know,
there's ads on these articles in a lot of times,
and you gotta get people to click on 'em. So you have,
have maybe a title to that article that's not totally accurate or bends the
truth a little bit, or it's well.
Never gets more, more desperate cuz they just need to keep feeding the beast.
So I think the key difference is like, I would imagine, you know,
I never got to be a science writer, writer editor in 1990,
but back then journalism was healthy and I bet you could be a writer. You know,
you publish it still hard work, but you publish three articles a week,
four articles a week when I was editing science of us,
that was the sort of behavioral science site at New York magazine.
I forget what it was. I think we had to publish like 15 to 20 things a week.
So when Harvard, yeah, dude, when Harvard sends you a press release,
so like we have this amazing new study, we're like, great. Write it up.
We don't call the researcher. Don't read it closely.
Oftentimes we read the press release, but not the study itself. Mm.
And it it's sort of like, um,
the press release is often, they don't quite lie,
but they leave out a lot of details. And,
and so 2010 was sort of the peak when the stuff in my book in psychology,
like the worst psychology was being published,
2010 was all also when things got really, really click baby, I think.
Why was what,
what happened in 2010 that like the worst psychology got published.
This is where it gets complicated, but like certain areas of research.
So one of them is called social priming. And that's the idea that if I like,
if I flash an American flag before your eyes for 300 milliseconds,
you'll get way more patriotic.
And it sounds like voodoo do magic. But for a while,
people really believe these results.
And the reason they believe them is cuz like there's all these ways you can up
statistically and you publish stuff that appears to be true, but isn't false.
So let's say I asked you off the bat, uh,
take the top psychology journals around what percentage of the findings
in them would you, it could be replicated later on if.
You run it back. Oh, I have no idea.
It's about a 50%.
There's a coin flip chance that anything you read in the top psychology
journals, some people think it's high or something is lower.
Have you ever read the stuff that Helen pluck rose and James Lindsay and Peter
BOGO and put out, I've read some of their stuff. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Where they,
they published these sort SoCal square satirical. Yeah. Uh,
satirical scientific papers that, uh, actually got the dog dog rape. Yeah.
The, yeah. Well what it had the most CRA see if you can find the,
the title of their, their dog, cuz it wasn't, it was,
it had to do with homosexuality and, but it, but meanwhile,
they were getting like lauded for these things.
They were getting applauded for uh, like fat body building. Right?
Like there's a lot of where they were joking around about how bad academia
has gotten. Yeah.
And they made these far circle papers and some of 'em won awards.
A lot of the problems they are concerned with,
it's not just sort of like the wacky, whatever Marxist geography.
It's like some of the top psychology papers in the country. Right. And I,
I it's tricky cuz like I want people to trust experts.
I want people to trust science,
but a lot of scientists themselves don't know what they're doing. Yeah.
It makes it complicated.
A lot of scientists don't know what they're doing. How so?
So, um, it's hard to, to explain this without getting into,
into some statistics, I'm not good at statistics,
but basically people realize that like the tests,
the statistical tests people do to decide if something is significant,
meaning like we're pretty sure. Uh,
Joe Rogan comes out with the pill to cure the common cold.
We give 50 people that pill. We give 50 people, a placebo,
the people who take the pill do better.
The cold goes away at a certain threshold. You're like, this is a real result.
This isn't just random statistical noise.
And it turns out there's lots of ways to fool yourself into thinking the pill
works when it doesn't. Uh,
and that's basically what psychologists realized and that led them to understand
that like arguably, most of what they publish is just, is garbage. Basically.
Do you, do you know what a nocebo is? Yeah. Yeah.
That's one of my favorite stories was a guy who was involved in a test, uh,
where they were doing a study or they, uh, gave him, um,
they gave, you know, one group, uh,
an SSRI SSRI. And uh, the other group, they gave a placebo.
This guy for whatever reason,
took a load of pills and ran to the hospital with an elevated pulse,
high blood pressure, holding this pill bottle, freaking out,
thinking he's dying, um,
telling them that he up and he took the whole bottle auto pills and he's gonna
die. Um, they contact the physician.
The physician comes down and informs him that he was a part of the control group
and he had taken a placebo and within minutes his heart rate drops down to
normal. His blood pressure drops down normal and he's fine.
So this guy who was convinced he was gonna die,
had just completely done into to himself. He had I,
that he had taken some sort of poison or something, you know,
some horrible medication and, and far exceeding the dose.
You're supposed to take catch new episodes that Joe Rogan experience for free
only on Spotify, watch back catalog Jr E videos on Spotify,
including clips easily seamlessly switch between video
and audio experience on Spotify.
You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can
download episodes to save on data cost. All for free.
Spotify is absolutely free.
You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes.
You us need to search for the Jerry on your Spotify app.
Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.